chore(dev): make easy to run dev against isolated postgresql and backend instance using env variables so you can develop more in parallel (#6466)
molgenis/molgenis-emx2: docs/molgenis/dev_quickstart.md

Give the worktree its **own Postgres instance** — a second server in Postgres.app, or any separate cluster, on its own port. A separate *database name* on the shared `:5432` server is **not** enough: `gradle test` and `cleandb` drop roles that are cluster-wide, so they reach into every checkout using that server. Seed the new instance:

```console
psql -p 5435 -f .circleci/initdb.sql
```

Then declare the stack, picking ports nothing else on your machine uses — stay off `8080` (the default, so somebody else's checkout has it) and off `8081` (historically the webapi test port):

```
MOLGENIS_POSTGRES_URI=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5435/molgenis
MOLGENIS_POSTGRES_USER=molgenis
MOLGENIS_POSTGRES_PASS=molgenis
MOLGENIS_HTTP_PORT=8083
```

Every Gradle task in this checkout — `run`, `dev`, `cleandb` and the test tasks — now targets that instance with no extra flags, and every app dev server proxies to `http://localhost:8083`. Start the stack as above: `./gradlew dev` plus a `pnpm dev` per app.

### Which backend a dev server talks to

> Per key the order is: `MOLGENIS_APPS_HOST` / `NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE` set in `.env`, otherwise derived from `MOLGENIS_HTTP_PORT` in `.env`, otherwise those two keys in the ambient shell, otherwise each app's own fallback. `.env` deliberately beats the ambient shell: an `export NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE=...` in a shell profile otherwise pins every worktree at once to a backend none of them declared. Gradle's `-D` is the one per-run override: `./gradlew dev -DMOLGENIS_HTTP_PORT=9000`.

Reviewer: I find this section tough to comprehend.
How about something like this?

```suggestion
### Which backend a frontend app (`pnpm dev`) talks to

Vite apps read `MOLGENIS_APPS_HOST`, Nuxt apps read `NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE`. Both
resolve the same way — the first match wins:

1. the key itself, set in `.env`
2. `http://localhost:<MOLGENIS_HTTP_PORT>`, derived from the port in `.env`
3. the key exported in your shell environment
4. the app's own fallback (usually `https://emx2.dev.molgenis.org`)

Note that `.env` beats your shell environment. This is on purpose, and it is the opposite of the usual dotenv rule, because an `export NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE=...` in a shell profile would otherwise point *every* worktree at one backend that none of them declared. Note that this order applies to **every** key in `.env`.

For a one-off change, use a `-D` system property on the Gradle command line — it
beats `.env`:

`./gradlew dev -DMOLGENIS_HTTP_PORT=9000`
```

Author: Thanks — this was a real readability improvement. I took your numbered first-match list and the "which app reads which key" clarification, and tightened the rest: dropped the extra prose and the "applies to every key in `.env`" line, since the derivation step is specific to the two host keys and that generalization isn't quite accurate. Landed in `18bb5b62c`.
